Good day i'm Norman Wildberger in today's
video we're going to carry on thinking
about the isometry groups of the projective
line i want to expand the discussion today
by changing the base of our pizza by moving from
the rational number underlying number system
to a finite field in particular to the very
simple finite field with only three elements
and then we'll have another look at the
finite field with five elements the same story
so this still gives a very rich euclidean geometry
and most of the aspects of euclidean geometry that
we're familiar with when stated in the correct
general way have a manifestation in this geometry
over a finite field setting but surprisingly
there are also some new developments okay in
particular there's this phenomenon of null lines
or for us null points which we have not yet seen
in the rational situation but which becomes
rather important for some finite fields
so these are familiar enough to physicists
physicists who are working with einstein's
theory of special relativity for them the
relativistic analogs of these things are
playing a very important role and correspond
in fact to the propagation of light
and photons but in fact it turns out that
these null lines or null points are really
an intrinsic aspect to euclidean geometry as
well once we start to think broadly enough
so we're going to be talking about some
algebraic structure called group structure which
arises from looking at the isometries of
this projective line with the euclidean
framework on it we're going to be interested in
laying out this group structure very explicitly
and to do that rather efficiently i'd like to
introduce a little bit of additional notation
that simplifies a little bit discussion of
projective points and rotations and reflections
here's our familiar situation projective points
so this one is the one to one this one is a one
two this is what one to zero what we're going
to do is we introduce a bit of new notation
so when we have a projective one point like this
we can think about the line x equals one in the
ambient two-dimensional space and that gives us
kind of a reference or a viewing line and most
every projective one point will meet this green
line in a single point which has x coordinate one
that allows us to specify such a projective one
point by only specifying what the y-coordinate
is of that particular point that it meets
this green line on so for example this
line here can be written as the point one to
two can also be written as 2 to 4 or 3 to 6
but if we normalize so that that first coordinate
is 1 then the second coordinate is unique and
we can therefore then represent this projective
point more efficiently by just calling it a sub 2.
similarly this line or this projective one point
cannot be referred to as a sub 1 this one as
a sub 0 this one is a sub minus 1. and every
projective one point can be expressed this way
with the sole exception of the vertical
one the one whose name is zero to one
we cannot normalize that so that
its first coefficient has one
and so in keeping with our thinking in
earlier videos when we were talking about
the projective line and adding a point at infinity
we actually had the viewing line horizontal in
that case here we're having a vertical viewing
line which is more appropriate for what we're
doing here there we refer to this thing as a point
at infinity and so in keeping with that we'll
call this projective one point a sub infinity
and then in keeping with that we'll shorten
our notation for rotations and reflections
so that our rotation of the form one to
l will be shortened to just rho sub l
while rho sub 0 to 1 will be called rho sub
infinity similarly with reflections sigma 1 to l
will be called sigma l and sigma
0 1 will be called sigma infinity
all right so here are the two fundamental formulas
that define our projective rotation and our
projective reflection how would we translate
these into our new more efficient notation
well if we call this thing a sub
l and call this thing rho sub k
means we're basically assuming this is
a form 1 to l and this is a form 1 to k
well this is 1 to l and this is 1 to k then
this is going to be 1 minus k times l and
this is going to be k plus l and then when we
renormalize this so that the first coefficient
is 1 we have to divide by this term giving
the expression k plus l over 1 minus k times l
so please check that that actually
works and that's similarly
this formula for the projective reflection
is transformed in this sort of more efficient
setting in the following way that if you
take a projective point l and apply sigma k
then you get a sub k minus l over
one plus k l a bit of symmetry here
the plus sign here changes to a minus sign
while the minus sign here changes to a plus sign
these are going to be useful formulas for us they
efficiently tell us how the rotations and the
reflections act on our projective one points
written more efficiently in the form a sub l
to clarify those more efficient formulas here
are some special cases or perhaps additional
formulas that help us in recording what the effect
of rotations and reflections are on various things
all right so i'll leave you to
check these various formulas
all right now i'd like to turn to the main object
in this video which is to try to generalize
our projective one-dimensional geometry to the
case where the underlying number system is a
finite field and the finite field that we're going
to start with is the arguably simplest one f sub 3
which is determined by a single rule that three
equals 0. and otherwise it's pretty well like
rational number arithmetic so for example in f3
if we wanted to add 14 over 17 plus 25 over 19 we
would replace the fourteen with two because we can
throw away that multiple of three which is twelve
we replace the seventeen with two because we can
get rid of the multiple of three which is fifteen
similarly 25 is replaced with one throw away
24 and 19 is replaced with one throw away 18.
and then we do ordinary arithmetic
that's one plus one for a total of two
similarly for example here 10 over 11 is minus 49
over 7. 10 is the same as 1 11 is the same as 2.
49 is the same as 1 7 is also the same as 1 so
we have one half minus 1 which is minus a half
and then there's this trick of converting that
into an actual integer by in this case multiplying
top and bottom by two the two squared on the
bottom becomes four which is the same as one so
basically just get minus two which if
we like to use the same as one add three
okay so by this method of adding multiples
of three or subtracting multiples of three
and getting rid of denominators by this
kind of trick we can take any number in
our system and convert it to one
of these three to either zero
one or two or alternatively one
of the numbers minus one zero one
this is going to be a little bit more convenient
for us for our particular application this is
usually a little bit more familiar these in fact
are the three most important numbers when we're
doing arithmetic right so the field f3 consists
of exactly the three most important numbers
and then here are two little tables that record
addition and multiplication in this domain with
the numbers minus one zero and one so for example
if we wanted to add one plus one here's one
there's one one plus one is minus one usually one
plus one is two but if we are allowed to subtract
three then that's the same as minus one and
multiplication a minus one times minus one is one
minus one times one is minus one 0 times anything
is 0 1 times anything is the original thing
so all of the arithmetic is contained in these two
tables just a finite amount of arithmetic
all right and now let's do some geometry
we'll talk about the projective line p1
over this finite field with three elements
here are the projective one points one to minus
one one to zero one to one and zero to one
which we're gonna denote by a sub minus one a
sub zero a sub one and this one a sub infinity
every other projective one point is the same as
one of these so for example two to two is the
same as one to one because it's just a multiple
of that two to one for example is the same as
four to two which is the same as one to
two which is the same as one to minus one
okay and then we have our
formula for projective quadrances
and it's the same formula as before so for example
if we want the coordinates between a sub minus one
and a sub zero that's the quantity
between one to minus one and one to zero
the formula is one times zero minus
one times minus one all squared
over the product one squared plus minus one
squared times one squared plus zero squared
this turns out to be a half which is also equal
to minus one but i'm going to keep the half here
because it connects a little bit with our
familiar thinking so we could say that the
half is the same as -1 but we'll leave it as a
half and here then is a table of the quadrances
between these various four points and themselves
the quadrants between any point in itself is zero
the quadrants between a minus one and a sub
zero is a half as is the quantity between a
minus one and a infinity while a minus one and a
sub one are perpendicular because their quadrance
is one and when i say quadrants here i'm
talking about projective quadrants everywhere
let's have a look at a visual representation
how can we visualize what's going on
well we can take a grid which
is basically the affine 2 space
formed over the field f3 which has three
times three or nine points there they are
with x coordinates going from minus one through
to zero up to one and y coordinates minus one
zero to one and then the actual projective
points are lines through the origin in this case
and there's a sub zero there's a sub
1 there's a sub minus 1 and there is a
sub infinity so for example a sub 0 what we're
calling a sub 0 can be thought of as the point
1 0 or the point -1 0 those
are both representations of
a sub 0. a sub 1 represented by one to one or
minus one to minus one a sub infinity represented
by zero to one or zero to minus one etc and if
we think about these things as actually short
little lines each sort of line only containing
essentially three points then we can draw right
angles representing perpendicularity much the same
way as we do in the ordinary rational plane and we
can denote a projective quadrant between that line
and that line by a little line and a half there
representing the fact that the quadrants
between a zero and a minus one is equal to half
so these two one points are perpendicular these
are also perpendicular and every other non-zero
quadrant is a half so now let's have a look at
the rotations and reflections in this situation
here is our geometry again our visualization of it
and now we're talking about the rotations
rho sub k and the reflection sigma sub k
and the formulas for the rotations are just
the same as they are in the euclidean case
and now you can check using the formulas
that these three tables together with this
one here explains or covers all the possible ways
that we can multiply a point by a rotation this
is the simplest because this rotation
rho sub 0 always acts as the identity
any point a sub l times rho sub 0 is equal to a
sub l geometrically if we think of this as meaning
the rotation acts on this point to give
us this point this is telling us that rho
sub zero is the identity transformation
which takes any point and leaves it fixed
but remember that was only one of several possible
interpretations of what this formula might mean
but nevertheless we'll stick with
that interpretation because it's
physically interesting for us and
it's one that we're familiar with
so here for example this is telling us that rho
sub 1 is basically a rotation since a 0 to a 1
sends a 1 to a infinity it says a infinity to a
sub minus 1 and it sends a sub minus 1 to a sub 0.
it's doing just what we expect the
rotation by 45 degrees or 8th of a turn
to look like rho sub minus 1 that takes this to
this this to this this to this and this to this
it's the opposite direction to rho sub 1. and rho
sub infinity takes a sub 0 to a sub infinity and
takes ace infinity to a sub 0. takes this
to this and this to this and similarly it
takes this one to this one and this one
to this one so this one fixes all four
these two move everyone to a different one
and this one here interchanges two in pairs
okay correspondingly there are
formulas for the for reflections
so what is the effect of sigma
zero well it sends a zero to a zero
sends a one to a minus one sends a minus one back
to a one and it sends a infinity to an infinity
geometrically you can think about
it as like reflection in this line
which sends this line to itself which sends this
line to itself and interchanges these two lines
so i've written this a little bit more efficiently
this way so that sigma 0 sends a0 to itself
and back again a infinity to itself and
back again and interchanges a1 a minus 1.
sigma 1 on the other hand interchanges a0 and
a1 and interchanges a infinity and a minus 1.
you can think about it as
reflection in a fictitious line
about here or also a reflection in a fictitious
line about here here is sigma minus 1 what it does
it interchanges a 0 and a minus 1 and a 1 and a
infinity and sigma infinity is a little bit more
like this one it fixes a one fixes a minus
one and interchanges a zero and a infinity
all right so these encoding a lot of formulas
all basic consequences of the basic definitions
of reflections and rotations and you can check
these and you might like to play around with
composing them and what happens if we do this
reflection and this rotation and so on because
now i'm going to put all of that together
how the whole structure of all eight of these
isometries looks like when we think about their
group structure all right and now here we come to
the group structure of these eight isometries
which is a very interesting and important
mathematical object an algebraic structure
which is very simple relatively simple
still not that simple but plays an interesting
role in uh in group theory very important role
in group theory and also in linear
algebra as i discussed in my wildland
series on linear algebra okay so what does this
mean well here we have the eight isometries
the four rotations and the four reflections and
here similarly for rotations and four reflections
and these entries signify the product
of these various things so this row
sub 1 means that if we take rho sub infinity and
multiply it by rho sub minus 1 we get rho sub 1.
and what that means is that it's basically rho
infinity times rho minus 1 equals rho sub 1.
so if we act by multiplying by this
one and then we act by multiplying
by that one that composition is the same
thing as simply multiplying by rho sub 1.
okay there's lots of interesting things to do
here first of all one should check this table
make sure that it actually works that can be made
simpler if you know a little bit of linear algebra
a little bit of two by two matrices helps us
here so here are the corresponding two by two
matrices for those of you who know some linear
algebra that correspond to these isometries
and there's of course some interesting things
about this table because this is actually a group
a multiplication table it satisfies the crucial
properties that it's associative and you can check
this associativity by taking any three elements
say row infinity row sub minus one and say sigma
one and multiplying them in that order in two
different ways so we can take rho infinity times
row sub minus one that's this one here and then
if we multiply this by what do we say sigma one
that would be rho one times sigma
one the result would be sigma zero
if we did it the other way around if we took
rho infinity times rho sub minus 1 times sigma 1
we should calculate rho sub minus 1 times sigma
1 which we do by going here and here we get sigma
infinity so the effect of that is rho infinity
times sigma infinity over here which is sigma zero
so basic associativity holds for this digraph
and you can check various instances of that very
useful thing to do we can know that each element
appears in every row and column exactly once
in particular the identity element rho sub zero
occurs in each row exactly once and occurs in each
column exactly once in fact every element
occurs exactly once in each row and column
so that basically covers both the identity and
the inverse properties of a group all at once
this group this group multiplication table has a
very special role in group theory it's one of the
two non-commutative groups of order eight there's
another one called the quaternion group which also
plays a very important role okay so it's a
lovely example very explicit very concrete
there's no ambiguity whatsoever but of course
we have to check that things are really correct
so please have a little bit of a check and see if
you really agree with this table and you can play
around with a little bit of group theory now i'm
going to look at the same situation but over f5
the finite field with five elements we can think
of those five elements as being minus two minus
one zero one and two and so here is the affine
two plane formed from the field of five elements
with five times five elements x going from minus
two to two and y going from minus two to two
projectively we're still thinking about
lines through the origin in this situation
and what does that mean well we can take
just proportions that's really what it means
each one of these things is a proportion
and represents a line through the origin
so for example this one here 1 to minus
1 is that point there and that line
that proportion is the same as the proportion two
to minus two if we multiply both of them by two
it's the same as minus one to one what we get
when we multiply both of them by minus one
it's the same as minus two to 2. so each of these
four are just another name for this one point
here is a sub 0 which is this one
here is a sub 1 which is this one
here is a sub minus 1 the one we just
talked about here's a infinity this one
but there's also two lines here a sub minus two
and a sub two which are a little bit different and
you can see that geometrically they look different
so a sub two consists of this one this one as well
as this one and this one visually a sub minus 2 is
this one this one this one and this one it really
is just proportion so if we look at a sub minus
2 which is 1 to minus 2 that's that point there
if we multiply this by 2 we get 2 to minus 4 which
is the same as 2 to 1 which is this point here
so although it doesn't look like it geometrically
this point in the affine two plane is really twice
this point in the field f5 so this
is actually a multiple of this one
just as this is a multiple of this just that
visually it looks a little bit different
but that's not what's really different about these
two one point the difficulty or difference between
them is that these are what we might call
null points and what makes them null points
is that the sum of the squares of their
entries is 0. 1 squared plus minus 2 squared
is 5 which is 0 in f5 and similarly 1 squared plus
2 squared is 5 which is 0 in f5 this is a new kind
of phenomena that we don't get in the rational
numbers and that we haven't seen in f3 either
one of the consequences of this
is that when we are talking about
projective quadrances between these one points
these two are going to behave differently because
in the formula for the projective quadrants
this sum of squares appears in the denominator
and if you have zero in the denominator it means
that things basically don't work arithmetically
so what we're seeing is that the
quadrants or the projective quadrants
between these points and any other
point is undefined because there's a
zero in the denominator our formula
gives us zeros in the denominator
notice that otherwise if we just
restrict ourselves to these four
points which are not null that the pattern
of projective quadrances looks a lot like
it did in the f3 case in fact
it looks exactly the same
a sub minus 1 is perpendicular to a sub 1
a sub 0 is perpendicular to a sub infinity
and all the other projective quadrances
are a half between two different fellows
and the the quadrants between any
one point in itself is of course zero
all right so this is a very interesting phenomena
that we're only seeing here for the first time
when we've extended our euclidean
geometry to the finite setting
and we've gone to the field with five elements we
didn't see it in the field with three elements but
with five elements we're seeing something
that we haven't seen before the idea that
we have a null point our one dimensional geometry
has some special points which are in some sense
singular they are special the definition of the
metrical structure is more problematic for them
we have to admit that the formulas that we write
down actually don't work for those particular
null points so we have to exclude them from
our consideration of projective quadrances
so here are the formulas for the
projector rotation and reflections
the rows and the sigmas we call this star before
a few videos ago i showed you that in
general rows of a to b is an isometry
we had a proof of that that meant that
if we take two one points and compute the
quadrants between them and then multiply by
this symbol we get two more points which have
the same quadrants as the original two did
and that proof of that was completely algebraic
and if you look back to the proof you will see
that at some point i cancelled an a squared plus
b squared from the numerator and denominator
didn't make a big deal out of it at that time
but whenever you're cancelling something from the
numerator and denominator you should pause and say
do i know that this is actually non-zero because
if this is zero then i'm basically getting rid of
a problem here which i really am not allowed to do
now for the rational numbers
what we were considering before
a squared plus b squared is never
zero because if we have a proportion
if at least one of them is non-zero then a
squared plus b squared is necessarily non-zero
so that issue does not arise for rational numbers
but for more general fields it is possible for a
squared plus b squared to be equal to zero
and then our proof that this was an isometry
or the corresponding proof that this is an
isometry simply fails the argument fails
all right so here's some investigations
now that i'm going to leave to you
they're fun but they do involve a bit of
work and becoming familiar with the the
way things work here in this field with five
elements the first is to show that if you take
one of these offending fellows row sub 1 to
2. this is a null point that if we take any
one point and we multiply it by
row sub 1 2 we always get 1 to 2.
no matter what we start with here
the end point is always one to two
in particular this thing is not an isometry
and you can also check that the same thing
occurs for the sigmas so when we're talking
about isometries we have to exclude row one to
two and we have to exclude row one to minus two
and also sigma one to two and sigma one to minus
two so the last exercise is please have a look at
what actually this group structure is
in the situation of the projective line
over f5 so our last exercise and quite a sizable
one so there's a lot of investigation to do here
i'm going to leave that to you to investigate the
group structure of the isometries of p1 over f5
and our list of isometries notably does
not include rho sub 2 or rho minus 2 or
sigma sub 2 and sigma sub minus 2 because they
have this property well that they're just not
isometries so it turns out that symbolically
at least the isometries that we have in this
situation over f5 look a lot like the ones that
we had in fact look exactly like the ones we had
over f3 show that in fact we get exactly the
same dihedral group structure as we did for f3
all right many interesting questions i
guess pop up we've talked about f3 and f5
these are very small finite fields what happens to
bigger finite fields what kind of multiplicative
or group structures do we get when we think
about isometries of our simple one-dimensional
projective line over these bigger fields it's
quite an interesting question which we're not
quite in a position to tackle yet we need a
little bit more number theory to deal with that
but before i get to the number theory i'd like to
say a little bit more about another extension of
this idea of isometries of the projective line
so we're going to enlarge the picture yet more
not just by considering wider possibilities for
the fields but also wider possibilities for the
toppings that we're going to put on top of our
pizza namely different kinds of metrical structure
that we can impose on our projective line in other
words we're going to move towards relativistic
geometry still in the one-dimensional setting
which turns out to be quite important for
relativistic physics so i hope you'll join me for
that i'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening